ISO 27001 — Practical Implementation
==============================================

Purpose
-------

This document explains how Thinkwerke interprets and implements
**ISO 27001** for modern, cloud-native and product-centric organisations.

The focus is on **making ISO 27001 executable** across platforms, pipelines,
and operating models — not on producing documentation for its own sake.

---

What ISO 27001 Actually Requires
--------------------------------

ISO 27001 requires organisations to:

- Establish governance and accountability
- Identify and manage information security risks
- Implement appropriate controls
- Monitor effectiveness
- Produce evidence on demand

It does **not** prescribe tools, architectures, or processes.
Those decisions must align with how the organisation actually operates.

---

Common Failure Patterns
-----------------------

In cloud environments, ISO 27001 initiatives often fail due to:

- Controls defined only at policy level
- Technical controls implemented inconsistently
- No ownership model across engineering and security
- Evidence collected manually during audits
- Audit panic and delivery disruption

Thinkwerke addresses these issues at design time.

---

Thinkwerke Interpretation Model
-------------------------------

ISO 27001 is implemented through four connected layers:

1. Governance and ownership
2. Technical control implementation
3. Operational workflows
4. Continuous evidence generation

Each layer must reinforce the others.

---

Statement of Applicability (SoA)
--------------------------------

The SoA is treated as a **control register**, not a document.

Thinkwerke ensures the SoA:

- Maps controls to real systems
- Identifies technical owners
- References implementation locations
- Points to live evidence sources

This makes the SoA defensible and usable during audits.

---

Technical Control Implementation
--------------------------------

Controls are implemented across:

- Cloud identity and access management
- Network and platform configurations
- CI/CD pipelines
- Vulnerability and incident workflows
- Logging and monitoring systems

Where possible, controls are enforced automatically.

---

Evidence by Design
------------------

Evidence is generated continuously through:

- Pipeline execution logs
- Configuration states
- Approval workflows
- Security event handling
- Change management records

Audits become verification exercises, not discovery exercises.

---

Operational Integration
-----------------------

ISO 27001 controls are embedded into:

- Secure software lifecycle processes
- Vulnerability management workflows
- Incident response procedures
- Change and release management

This prevents ISO 27001 from becoming an external compliance burden.

---

Audit Readiness
---------------

With this approach, organisations can:

- Respond to audits without scrambling
- Demonstrate control effectiveness live
- Answer auditor questions with system evidence
- Reduce audit duration and friction

Audits no longer interrupt delivery.

---

Relationship to Other Regulations
---------------------------------

ISO 27001 forms the backbone for:

- NIS2 operational controls
- CRA product security expectations
- Customer security assessments
- SOC 2-style assurance

This document should be read alongside:

- :doc:`nis2`
- :doc:`cra`
- :doc:`crosswalks`

---

Key Takeaway
------------

ISO 27001 succeeds when it is treated as
an **engineering and operating discipline**.

When controls are implemented where work happens,
compliance becomes sustainable, auditable, and scalable.

